CHAPTER I

EARLY RECOLLECTIONS


My father, Prince Theodore Galitzine, married my mother being a widower
with five children, three of whom died before my birth. My earliest vivid
recollections begin when I was two years old. I distinctly remember
feeling a terrible pain in parting with my wet-nurse, to whom I was
passionately attached. I got hold of her skirt and wouldn’t let her go,
weeping wildly. It was my first bitter affliction. I could not put up
with the new nurse, whom I hated from the depths of my little heart, and
I would not call her otherwise than _Wild Cat_, with baby petulance,
having already at that early age pronounced likes and dislikes. We were
in perpetual state of warfare. When I was about three years old that
nurse was succeeded by a pretty Belgian girl named Melle. Henriette. The
tutor of my two step-brothers, Mr. Liziar, made love to her and finished
by marrying her some time after. He seemed somewhat half-witted; by night
he went to chime the bells at the belfry of our village church in Dolgik,
a fine estate belonging to my father, in the government of Kharkoff,
and also amused himself by breaking, in the conservatory, the panes of
glass with big stones. One day he frightened his sweetheart nearly to
death by throwing a snake under her feet. After all these pranks it
is no way astonishing that Mr. Liziar finished his days in a lunatic
asylum. The tutor who succeeded him, asked my parents to bring his wife
with him. He hastened to pocket the hundred roubles taken beforehand on
account of his salary, and departed suddenly to Kharkoff to fetch her.
Meanwhile my father received a letter from this tutor’s legitimate wife
dated from St. Petersburg, in which she entreated papa to send her the
half of her husband’s monthly salary, telling him he spent all his money
on his mistress, whilst his wife and children had not a morsel of bread
to put into their mouths. Of course, this too _Don Juanesque_ tutor was
instantly dismissed.

My parents at that time kept an open house. On great occasions my smart
nurse would appear in the dining-room carrying me in her arms, attired
like a little fairy, all ribbons and lace, to be admired by our guests.
She put me down on the table, and I promenaded quite at my ease between
the flowers and fruits.

I was born under fortunate auspices, there could not be a happier
little girl; good things were thrown down upon me: presents, petting,
admiration. At an early age I chose as my motto: “_Fais ce que voudras._”
Whatever I wished for, I very certainly had, and I didn’t see how anybody
could want to refuse me in anything.

I was often sent down to the drawing-room to be admired by the afternoon
callers, and mamma ordered me to let myself be kissed by unkissable
grown-ups, who paid me those compliments shown to children, who are
precious to their parents, and which made me intolerably conceited.
I stood in great danger of being completely spoilt, and mamma, who
was afraid that I received a good deal more flattery than she thought
good for me, ordered me to answer what I was told: “_Comme Vava[1] est
jolie!_”—“_Vava n’est pas jolie, elle est seulement gentille._” But,
nevertheless, I knew that I was pretty, my glass told me so.

At the age of four I could read and write fairly well, and chatted freely
in French. I was immensely proud when my nurse ended putting me to bed in
the daytime, and when I was old enough to sit at table, able to handle my
knife and fork properly. My greatest delight was to ride on my brothers’
backs and to be swung by them in a sheet, that they held by the four
corners and lifted me as high as they could, whilst I crowed gleefully,
my bare legs waving happily in the air. Mamma hastened with my nurse to
my rescue, and carried me off, paying but little attention to the wild
shrieks with which I requested to be tossed higher and higher. There was
a speedy end to all this fun; destiny itself interfered to stop these
aerial gymnastics: I had a bad fall one day, tumbling out of the sheet,
and my infatuation for this sport disappeared completely.

It was a source of infinite delight to me to creep on the knees of Mr
Vremeff, an intimate friend of my parents, a charming old gentleman with
snowy white hair, and hear him relate entrancing fairy tales for which I
had an insatiable appetite. As soon as he had finished one story, I asked
for another and another.

At that time my father was marshal of nobility of the district of
Kharkoff. One day he was suddenly called to St. Petersburg, and, during
his absence, we received the news that he was appointed chamberlain to
His Majesty the Emperor. I wept bitterly when I was told that papa must
wear the chamberlain’s key, persuaded that he would be obliged to adorn
even his _robe de chambre_ with that ugly ornament, which must completely
transform my dear old dad.


My parents, going to St. Petersburg, generally paid flying visits to my
aunt Galitzine, who lived in Moscow. I made my first journey with them at
the mature age of four. If the faults of children develop as they grow
older, I was to become a pickpocket, for I had the bad habit of hiding
in my pockets all sorts of broken toys belonging to the Karamzins,—two
little pupils of my aunt! When I went to bed my nurse emptied my pockets,
crying out at the enormity of my dreadful conduct.

My birthday was a great day for festivities. I received lots of lovely
presents and sweets. On the eve of my birthday I went to bed with
expectations of a pleasant awaking, and the first thing when I woke up in
the morning was to put my hand under my pillow and pull out the presents,
laid there by my parents during my sleep.
